Young, L., & Saxe, R. (2011). When ignorance is no excuse: Different roles for
intent across moral domains. Cognition, 120(2), 202–214.

Appendix
Stimuli
Experiments 1A, 2, and 3
Intentional & Accidental Violations
“How morally wrong was the action?”
Harm
Allergy - Intentional: Imagine your cousin is over for dinner. You know she is allergic to
peanuts. You decide to add peanuts to the dish because they really bring out the flavor for you.
You grind up the peanuts, add them in, and serve your cousin.
Allergy - Accidental: Imagine your cousin is over for dinner. You have no idea she is allergic to
peanuts. You decide to add peanuts to the dish because they really bring out the flavor for you.
You grind up the peanuts, add them in, and serve your cousin.
Poison - Intentional: Imagine you and a co-worker are taking a tour of a chemical plant. During
the coffee break, you go to pour some coffee. You like yours black, but your co-worker asks for
sugar in hers. You spoon some powder into your co-worker’s coffee. You know full well that
you are putting poison in her coffee.
Poison - Accidental: Imagine you and a co-worker are taking a tour of a chemical plant. During
the coffee break, you go to pour some coffee. You like yours black, but your co-worker asks for
sugar in hers. You spoon some powder into your co-worker’s coffee. You do not know that
someone replaced the sugar with poison.
Incest
Sibling - Intentional: Imagine you are at a dorm party and really hit it off with someone. This
person feels the same way about you. That night, you end up talking, and you discover that
you are actually long lost siblings. At the end of the night, you decide to sleep together (using
two forms of birth control to be safe).
Sibling - Accidental: Imagine you are at a dorm party and really hit it off with someone. This
person feels the same way about you. At the end of the night, you decide to sleep together (using
two forms of birth control to be safe). The next day, you end up talking, and you discover
that you are actually long lost siblings.
Parent - Intentional: Imagine you were adopted at birth - you have never met your birth parents.
The weekend of your college reunion, you go to your school’s football game and meet someone
a bit older. You discover that this person is actually your biological parent. You two get along
really well and, that night, end up sleeping together (using two forms of birth control to be safe).
Parent - Accidental: Imagine you were adopted at birth - you have never met your birth parents.
The weekend of your college reunion, you go to your school’s football game and meet someone
a bit older. You have no idea that this person is actually your biological parent. You two get
along really well and, that night, end up sleeping together (using two forms of birth control to be
safe).
Ingestion
Dog - Intentional: Imagine that a car just killed your beloved dog. Your significant other has
heard that dog meat is delicious and freezes the meat of your dog before it goes bad. Later, you
decide to make yourself dinner. You see a package in the freezer. It is correctly labeled “dog”.
You end up eating your dog for dinner.
Dog - Accidental: Imagine that a car just killed your beloved dog. Your significant other has
heard that dog meat is delicious and freezes the meat of your dog before it goes bad. Later, you
decide to make yourself dinner. You see a package in the freezer. It is incorrectly labeled
“beef” – but it is actually the meat from your dog. Without realizing it, you end up eating
your dog for dinner.
Urine - Intentional: Imagine that you are waiting to brush your teeth while your friend is in the
bathroom. As she leaves, you notice a cup and a pregnancy test. Your friend warns you that the
cup contains her urine for her pregnancy test. You finish brushing your teeth and use that cup to
rinse out your mouth.
Urine – Accidental: Imagine that you are waiting to brush your teeth while your friend is in the
bathroom. As she leaves, you notice a cup and a pregnancy test. Your friend forgets to tell you
that the cup contains her urine for her pregnancy test. You finish brushing your teeth and use that
cup to rinse out your mouth.
Experiment 1B
Intentional & Accidental Violations - Third-person scenarios
“How morally wrong was the action?”
Harm
Allergy - Intentional: Imagine Sam's cousin is over for dinner. Sam knows she is allergic to
peanuts. Sam decides to add peanuts to the dish because they really bring out the flavor for Sam.
Sam grinds up the peanuts, adds them in, and serves the meal.
Allergy - Accidental: Imagine Sam's cousin is over for dinner. Sam has no idea she is allergic to
peanuts. Sam decides to add peanuts to the dish because they really bring out the flavor for Sam.
Sam grinds up the peanuts, adds them in, and serves the meal.
Incest
Sibling - Intentional: Imagine Sam is at a dorm party and really hits it off with someone. This
person feels the same way about Sam. That night, they end up talking, and they discover that
they are actually long lost siblings. At the end of the night, they decide to sleep together (using
two forms of birth control to be safe).
Sibling - Accidental: Imagine Sam is at a dorm party and really hits it off with someone. This
person feels the same way about Sam. At the end of the night, they decide to sleep together
(using two forms of birth control to be safe). The next day, they end up talking, and they
discover that they are actually long lost siblings.
Experiments 4 and 5
Failed Attempts
“How morally wrong was the decision to act?”
Harm
False Belief: Imagine your cousin is over for dinner. You think she is allergic to peanuts. But
you decide to add peanuts to the dish anyway because they really bring out the flavor for you.
You grind up the peanuts, add them in, and serve your cousin. But actually your cousin
isn’t allergic to peanuts at all, so she is able to enjoy the meal.
True Belief: Imagine your cousin is over for dinner. You know she is allergic to peanuts. But
you decide to add peanuts to the dish anyway because they really bring out the flavor for you.
But then you realize that you’re all out of peanuts, so you grind up some walnuts and add
those to the dish instead. You serve your cousin, and she is able to enjoy the meal.
Neutral: Imagine your cousin is over for dinner. You know that she is not allergic to peanuts. So,
you decide to add peanuts to the dish because they really bring out the flavor for you. You grind
up the peanuts, add them in, and serve your cousin. She enjoys the meal.
Incest
False Belief: Imagine you are at a dorm party and really hit it off with someone. This person
feels the same way about you. That night, you end up talking, and you decide that you are
actually long lost siblings. At the end of the night, you decide to sleep together (using two forms
of birth control to be safe). The next day, upon further investigation, you discover that you
are actually not related at all.
True Belief: Imagine you are at a dorm party and really hit it off with someone. This person feels
the same way about you. That night, you end up talking, and you discover that you are actually
long lost siblings. At the end of the night, you decide to sleep together (using two forms of birth
control to be safe). But then, because of a fire alarm in the building you don’t end up
sleeping together that night.
Neutral: Imagine you are at a dorm party and really hit it off with someone. This person feels the
same way about you. At the end of the night, you decide to sleep together (using two forms of
birth control to be safe).
