Young, L., & Saxe, R. (2008). The neural basis of belief encoding and integration in
moral judgment. Neuroimage, 40(4), 1912-1920.
Scenarios are organized in the following order:
I. Background: Information to set the scene (identical across all conditions)
II. Foreshadow: Information foreshadowing the outcome (neutral, negative)
III. Belief: Information stating the protagonist's belief about the situation (neutral,
negative)
IV. Action: Information about the protagonist's action and its outcome (neutral,
negative).
Note: Foreshadow and Belief presentation is interchangeable
*Participant responses follow a Likert scale from 1 (“Forbidden”) to 3 (“Permissible”)
COFFEE
Grace and her friend are taking a tour of a chemical plant. When Grace goes over to the
coffee machine to pour some coffee, Grace's friend asks for some sugar in hers. There is
white powder in a container by the coffee.
A. The white powder is just the regular sugar that the scientists use every day, and is
therefore perfectly safe to have in coffee.
B. The white powder is a very toxic left behind by a scientist, and therefore deadly when
ingested in any form.
A. The container is labeled “sugar”, so Grace believes that the white powder by the
coffee is sugar left out by the kitchen staff.
B. The container is labeled “toxic”, so Grace believes that the white powder is toxic
substance left behind by a scientist.
A. Grace puts the substance in her friend's coffee. Her friend drinks the coffee and is
fine.
B. Grace puts the substance in her friend's coffee. Her friend drinks the coffee and dies.
Putting the substance in was:
LAB
Dan is giving a visitor a tour of a lab. Before visitors enter the testing room, all test tubes
containing disease antigens must be contained in a chamber by flipping a switch. A
repairman has just come to fix the switch, which had been broken.
A. The switch has been successfully repaired, so the test tubes are quite safely contained.
Thus, anybody who enters the room will be safe and unexposed.
B. The switch is still broken, so the test tubes are out in the open. Thus, anybody who
enters the room will contract diseases and die.
1
A. Dan believes that the switch has been fixed after a conversation with the repairman,
so he believes it is safe for the visitor to enter.
B. Dan believes that the switch is still broken after a conversation with the repairman, so
he believes it is not safe for the visitor to enter.
A. Dan tells the visitor to enter the testing room. The visitor does not contract any
disease and is fine.
B. Dan tells the visitor to enter the testing room. The visitor contracts a deadly infectious
disease.
Telling the visitor to enter was:
JELLYFISH
Janet and her neighbor are kayaking in a part of the ocean with lots of jellyfish. Janet’s
neighbor asks her if she should go for a swim.
A. It is perfectly safe to swim in the ocean because the jellyfish don’t sting and are
totally harmless.
B. It is not safe to swim in the ocean because the jellyfish sting, and their stings are fatal.
A. Since Janet read information that said the ocean’s jellyfish are harmless, she believes
that it is quite safe to swim in the ocean.
B. Since Janet read information that said the ocean’s jellyfish are deadly, she believes
that it is not safe to swim in the ocean.
A. Janet tells her neighbor to go for a swim. Her neighbor does, enjoys the swim, and is
just fine.
B. Janet tells her neighbor to go for a swim. Her neighbor does, gets stung by jellyfish,
and dies.
Telling her neighbor to swim was:
BRIDGE
Ray and his girlfriend are hiking. They come across a long narrow bridge that spans a
steep canyon.
A. The bridge happens to be extremely sturdy and can easily carry the weight of many
people at once.
B. The bridge happens to be extremely unsteady and cannot carry the weight of even one
very light person.
A. Ray believes that whoever walks on the bridge will cross the canyon quite safely
because the bridge is maintained by the national park.
2
B. Ray believes that whoever walks on the bridge will break the bridge and fall into the
canyon because the bridge looks unsteady and old.
A. Ray says nothing as his girlfriend starts walking across the bridge. His girlfriend
reaches the other side safely.
B. Ray says nothing as his girlfriend starts walking across the bridge. His girlfriend
breaks the bridge and falls to her death.
Saying nothing was:
POOL
Leah is walking by a neighbor's swimming pool when she sees a child about to dive in.
A. The child is about dive into the deep end and have fun swimming around and playing
all day.
B. The child is about to dive into the shallow end and smack his head very hard on the
concrete bottom of the pool.
A. Because of a label on the side of the pool, Leah believes that the child is about to dive
safely into the deep end and swim around.
B. Because of a warning sign at the side of the pool, Leah believes that the child is about
to dive into shallow water and break his neck.
A. Leah walks by, without saying anything to the child. The child dives in and is fine.
B. Leah walks by, without saying anything to the child. The child dives in and breaks his
neck.
Walking by was:
MUSHROOMS
Lauren and an acquaintance are camping in the woods. Lauren spots some wild
mushrooms growing along the campsite. Lauren studies the mushrooms and consults her
plant life guide.
A. The mushrooms happen to be edible and delicious. They are the kind that one can buy
in the supermarket and put in salad.
B. The mushrooms happen to be lethal and tasteless. They are the kind that result in
painful convulsions and ultimately death.
A. Lauren sees a picture of an edible mushroom in her book that looks just like these
mushrooms at the campsite, so she believes that the mushrooms are edible.
B. Lauren sees a picture of a lethal mushroom in her book that looks just like these
mushrooms at the campsite, so she believes that the mushrooms are lethal.
3
A. Lauren offers the mushrooms to her acquaintance. Her acquaintance eats them and
finds them very tasty.
B. Lauren offers the mushrooms to her acquaintance. Her acquaintance eats them and
starts convulsing after 10 minutes.
Offering the mushrooms was:
LATEX
Anne sees a patient for a routine check-up. Anne normally uses latex gloves to examine
her patients.
A. This patient has been in contact with latex before and, like most people, does not have
an allergy to latex.
B. This patient has a lethal allergy to latex and cannot be examined with latex without
immediately going into shock.
A. Having read the information in the patient's records, Anne believes that the patient is
not allergic to latex and using latex gloves to examine him poses no risk to his health.
B. Having read the information in the patient's records, Anne believes that the patient is
highly allergic to latex and using latex gloves to examine him will result in his death.
A. Anne puts on latex gloves and examines her patient. The patient is fine.
B. Anne puts on latex gloves and examines her patient. The patient goes into shock.
Using latex gloves was:
MOTORBOAT
George is driving his motorboat in the bay, on his way home. He spots a swimmer in the
far distance.
A. The swimmer is in fact fine and is waving at George for fun as he does with people in
the bay.
B. The swimmer is in fact drowning and is waving frantically at George for help.
A. George sees the swimmer waving and believes that the swimmer is waving an
enthusiastic “hello”.
B. George sees the swimmer waving and believes that the swimmer is drowning and
waving desperately for help because his arm motions are so emphatic.
A. George drives home, leaving the swimmer behind. The swimmer is fine.
B. George drives home, leaving the swimmer behind. The swimmer drowns.
Leaving the swimmer behind was:
4
ASTHMA
Erica is driving home when she sees a runner by the side of the road. The runner is bent
over and has one hand on his chest. There is an empty asthma inhaler on the ground.
A. The runner is just short of breath and has stopped to rest for a moment before
continuing his long jog.
B. The runner is having a serious asthma attack and needs to get to a hospital
immediately before he goes into shock.
A. Because Erica doesn't see the inhaler, she believes that the runner has just stopped to
catch his breath and will continue his jog shortly.
B. Because Erica sees the inhaler and the gasping runner, she believes that the runner is
having an asthma attack and must get to a hospital immediately.
A. Erica continues to drive, leaving the runner. The runner catches his breath and is fine.
B. Erica continues to drive, leaving the runner. The runner collapses and dies.
Leaving the runner behind was:
VITAMIN
Gil is instructed by a doctor to give his senile wife pills for her heart disease. The doctor
says that she must not intake vitamin K within an hour in order to safely take the pills.
One day his wife tries a new kind of fruit.
A. The new kind of fruit does not have Vitamin K, so it is safe for Gil’s wife to take the
pills right away.
B. The new kind of fruit is high in Vitamin K, so it is deadly for Gil’s wife to take the
pills right away.
A. Gil does his research and believes that the new kind of fruit does not have vitamin K,
and that it is safe to give her the pills.
B. Gil does his research and believes that the new kind of fruit is high in vitamin K, and
that it is not safe to give her the pills.
A. Gil gives his wife the pills right away. His wife is just fine.
B. Gil gives his wife the pills right away. His wife dies of heart failure.
Giving the pills was:
SESAME
Kate is a waitress preparing to take a meal out to a customer's table. The customer is with
his friends, and he orders a meal that calls for sesame seeds.
5
A. The customer happens to love sesame seeds and that he will have no problem at all if
he eats the sesame seeds in his meal.
B. The customer happens to be highly allergic to sesame seeds and that he will most
likely die if he eats them in his meal.
A. After overhearing part of the customer’s conversation with his friends, Kate believes
that the customer loves sesame seeds.
B. After overhearing part of the customer’s conversation with his friends, Kate believes
that the customer is highly allergic to sesame seeds.
A. Kate puts the sesame seeds in. The customer enjoys his meal and is fine.
B. Kate puts the sesame seeds in. The customer eats his meal and dies.
Putting the sesame seeds in was:
BIKE
Ginny’s classmate wants to borrow her bike to go mountain biking. Ginny’s bike has just
come back from the repair shop. The brakes had not been working.
A. The brakes on Ginny’s bike are working perfectly now, so the bike is safe to ride.
B. The brakes on Ginny’s bike still aren’t working at all, so the bike is very dangerous to
ride.
A. The people at the repair shop told Ginny that the brakes are fully fixed now, and gave
her a demo to explain how they were fixed, so she believes the bike is safe.
B. The people at the repair shop told Ginny that the brakes are still broken, and gave her
a demo to explain why they aren’t fixed, so she believes the bike is unsafe.
A. Ginny lends the bike to her classmate. Her classmate bikes up a mountain and has a
wonderful time.
B. Ginny lends the bike to her classmate. Her classmate bikes off a cliff on the side of
the mountain road because she can’t brake.
Lending the bike was:
IRON
Josephine and her little sister are in the bathroom doing makeovers by the sink. Josephine
had straightened her hair earlier in the day using a straightening iron. The iron is still on
the sink.
A. Josephine’s mother had turned the button on the iron off three hours ago, so it is no
longer hot and is perfectly safe to touch.
B. Josephine’s mother had just used the iron herself five minutes ago, so it is still
extremely hot and could cause severe burns.
6
A. Since the cord on the iron was unplugged, Josephine believes that it is no longer hot
and cannot burn her sister.
B. Since the cord on the iron is still in the socket, Josephine believes that it is still hot
and could easily burn her sister.
A. Josephine lets her sister continue to play by the sink. Her sister’s arm hits the iron, but
it’s okay since the iron is cold. They have fun continuing their makeovers.
B. Josephine lets her sister continue to play by the sink. Her sister’s arm hits the iron,
and she gets badly burned. She cries hysterically all the way the emergency room.
Letting her sister continue to play by the sink was:
MEATLOAF
Rebecca works at a day care. For lunch, Rebecca plans to make meatloaf for all of the
children. She opens a package of ground beef to make the meatloaf.
A. The meat is actually completely fresh, because the package was tightly sealed while
stored in the fridge. So the meat is safe to eat.
B. The meat has some invisible but very deadly bacteria on it, because of a small tear in
the seal. So the meat is not safe to eat.
A. Rebecca believes that ground beef is perfectly safe to eat because the expiration date
on it is two weeks away from now.
B. Rebecca believes that the ground beef is not safe to eat, because the expiration date
on it passed two weeks ago.
A. Rebecca makes meatloaf out of the ground beef and serves it to the children. The
children eat the meal and find it delicious. They are quite full afterwards.
B. Rebecca makes meatloaf out of the ground beef and serves it to the children. The
children suffer from diarrhea, and are hospitalized with severe food poisoning.
Giving the meatloaf to the children was:
RIVER
Jacob and his friend are rafting down the Colorado River. Jacob’s friend is a novice.
They stop by the banks to have a swim. Jacob’s friend starts to swim downstream.
A. The next segment of the river is very tame this year. It is very easy to swim through,
and the scenery is particularly nice.
B. The next segment of the river is very rough and fast this year. It is full of gigantic
boulders that make it very dangerous to swim through.
7
A. Because Jacob has rafted down this part of the Colorado before, he believes the next
segment is very tame and gentle. He thinks his friend will be able to enjoy the
scenery.
B. Because Jacob has rafted down this part the Colorado before, he believes that the next
segment is very rough and dangerous. He thinks that the current will be too strong for
his friend.
A. Jacob silently watches, as his friend swims downstream. He swims safely down the
next segment of the river.
B. Jacob silently watches, as his friend swims downstream. He gets thrown by the
current and crashes into a gigantic boulder.
Silently watching as his friend starts swimming was:
LOGAN AIRPORT
Andrew works at Logan Airport. He is in charge of ensuring that the runways are clear of
debris that could damage planes during takeoff. A plane is about to take off on a distant
runway.
A. The distant runway has been completely cleared. It is ready for the plane to use for
takeoff.
B. The distant runway has not yet been cleared. There is potentially damaging debris on
it.
A. Andrew checks with his supervisor and believes that the runway has already been
cleared of any debris. He thinks that it’s safe for the plane to taxi.
B. Andrew checks with his supervisor and believes that the runway has not yet been
cleared of debris. He thinks that it may be unsafe for the plane to taxi.
A. Andrew gives the OK for the takeoff. The place takes off on time from the distant
runway. The takeoff is safe and without incident.
B. Andrew gives the OK for the takeoff. The plane takes off and suffers serious damage
from some debris. Three passengers are killed.
Not clearing the runway was:
TRACKS
Tyler works for a company that builds railway tracks for passenger trains. One day,
Tyler’s job is to fasten the track rods with an extra spike at dangerous corners.
A. The night team the previous night was very efficient, and they have already added
extra spikes to all corners in the first segment of the track. The whole segment is
entirely safe.
8
B. The night team the previous night was running late, so they did not finish adding
extra spikes to all corners in the first segment of track. In some places, the track is
still dangerous.
A. Tyler checks the work logs of the night team, and believes that they finished adding
the spikes to the whole first segment of track, so that part of the track is safe.
B. Tyler checks the work logs of the night team, and believes that they added spikes to
only part of the first segment of track, so some corners are still unsafe.
A. Tyler skips the whole first segment of track. The railway track is opened for
commercial use, and passenger trains are able to pass on the tracks safely.
B. Tyler skips the whole first segment of track. The railway track is opened for
commercial use, and a passenger train derails and crashes, killing 125 passengers.
Not fastening the corners on the first segment of track was:
HARNESS
Stacey and her friend are going rock climbing, and they are going to use harnesses to
scale a gigantic cliff. Stacey’s friend starts to put on the new harness.
A. The new harness is a top-of-the-line model, in fine working condition and completely
safe to use.
B. The clamp on the new harness is actually subtly flawed so the whole harness is
incredibly unsafe to use.
A. Because Stacey bought the harness from a quality sports store, Stacey believes that
the harness is in prime functioning condition.
B. Because the clamp on the harness does not audibly click into place, Stacey believes
that the harness is malfunctioning and not safe to use.
A. Stacey straps her friend into the harness. Her friend scales the cliff safely and enjoys
the exhilarating experience.
B. Stacey straps her friend into the harness. Halfway up the cliff, the harness gives way,
and her friend plummets to her death.
Strapping her friend into the new harness was:
IGLOO
Sarah built a huge play igloo out of snowballs yesterday. Her friend is over today, and
she is totally intrigued by the igloo.
A. The igloo is sturdily built. The snowballs have frozen solid into strong walls, so it’s
fine for Sarah’s friend to play inside all she wants.
9
B. The snowballs in the igloo walls are not properly balanced and will cave in at
moderate movement, so it’s not safe for Sarah’s friend to go inside.
A. Because she has built igloos like this many times before, Sarah believes that the igloo
has strong walls and ceilings and is safe to play in.
B. Because her mother warned her about playing in igloos like this, Sarah believes that
the igloo could cave in and is not safe to play in.
A. Sarah tells her friend to go inside the igloo. Her friend plays around inside and has a
great time pretending she’s an Eskimo.
B. Sarah tells her friend to go inside the igloo. Her friend jumps because she is excited,
and the icy snowballs crash in on her head.
Telling her friend to go inside the igloo was:
HAM
Noel and a friend are having lunch on Saturday. They are making sandwiches with stuff
from Noel’s fridge, when Noel’s friend says she’d prefer a ham sandwich.
A. The ham in the refrigerator is high quality and was purchased just a day ago. It’s fresh
and ready to be used in sandwiches.
B. The ham in the refrigerator was purchased a week ago and has since become slightly
spoiled, so it’s not safe to eat.
A. Since Noel’s mom always shops for meats only on Fridays, Noel believes that the
ham in the refrigerator is fresh and is safe to eat.
B. Since Noel’s mom usually shops for meat only on Sundays, Noel believes that the
ham in the refrigerator is very old and not safe to eat.
A. Noel makes a ham sandwich for her friend. Her friend enjoys the sandwich, and they
go outside to play afterwards.
B. Noel makes a ham sandwich for her friend. Her friend eats the sandwich and throws
up all night from food poisoning.
Making the ham sandwich for her friend was:
POPCORN
Matt is babysitting at his cousin’s house. They’re eating popcorn. Suddenly they hear a
loud beeping noise coming from the kitchen. Matt’s cousin gets up to investigate.
A. The beeping noise is from a smoke detector responding to leftover smoke coming
from the microwave where the Matt and his cousin burned popcorn. The situation in
the kitchen is not dangerous.
10
B. The beeping noise is from a carbon monoxide detector in the kitchen. Deadly carbon
monoxide is escaping from the furnace under the kitchen. The kitchen is now
dangerous.
A. Matt believes that the noise is the smoke detector because they had just burned a bag
of popcorn. He thinks going to the kitchen to turn off the beeping device is a very
good idea.
B. Matt believes that the noise is a carbon monoxide detector because his carbon
monoxide detector makes the same sound. He thinks going to the kitchen to turn off
the beeping device could cause his cousin to pass out.
A. Matt watches quietly while his cousin goes into the kitchen. His cousin goes into the
kitchen and returns laughing, saying that the burnt popcorn had made the smoke
alarm go off.
B. Matt watches quietly while his cousin goes into the kitchen. His cousin goes into the
kitchen and, while fidgeting with the device, passes out from carbon monoxide
inhalation.
Just watching while his cousin went into the kitchen was:
VET
Zach is a student working at a veterinarian’s office. His friend comes to visit him and
sees cookies shaped like bones laying out in the worker’s lounge. His friend asks if he
can eat one.
A. One of Zach’s coworkers had baked the cookies for her birthday and had put them out
for others to enjoy. They are delicious and safe to eat.
B. One of Zach’s co-workers had put the cookies in the lounge by accident. They are
used to put dogs to sleep, so they are poisonous to eat.
A. Zach believes that the cookies are safe to eat, since they are out in the workers’
lounge where people normally put food to share.
B. Zach believes that the cookies are poisonous, because they are the shape of the
cookies the veterinarian uses with special chemicals to put dogs to sleep.
A. Zach invites his friend to eat a dog bone-shaped cookie. His friend enjoys the cookie
and asks for a second one.
B. Zach invites his friend to eat a dog bone-shaped cookie. His friend breaks into a sweat
after several bites and stops breathing.
Inviting his friend to eat the cookie was:
11
CHAIRLIFT
Zoe is on winter break. She is running a chair lift at a ski lodge. She has just taken over
after lunch break and is starting her afternoon shift. The first passenger is a child.
A. This afternoon, the chair lift is functioning perfectly normally and can safely carry
passengers of any size up the side of the ski slope.
B. This afternoon, a problem with the electricity is making the old chairs bounce
violently, making the lift dangerous for small passengers.
A. Zoe believes that the ski lift is in good condition and is safe for anyone to ride, as
usual. She saw her coworker had sent a group of children on the chairlift before
lunch.
B. Zoe believes that the ski lift is in bad condition and is unsafe for children in particular
since her supervisor told her that it was malfunctioning before lunch.
A. Zoe starts the chairlift, and the child gets on. The child has a safe ride to the top of the
ski slope, skis down the hill, and returns to the chairlift again and again.
B. Zoe starts the chairlift, and the child gets on. About half way through the ride the
chairlift makes a massive jolt and sends the child falling 100 feet to her death.
Letting the child on the chair lift was:
SAFETY TOWN
Sam is babysitting a preschool boy. His job is to watch the boy at Safety Town, a class
designed to help children know what to do in a fire. Today the children will go into a fake
house full of smoke.
A. The boy has very strong lungs and is also used to second-hand smoke, so he will be
comfortable going into the Safety Town smoking house.
B. The boy has asthma, which makes his lungs close up around smoke, so he will not be
able to breathe if he goes into the Safety Town smoking house.
A. Sam believes that the boy is familiar with smoky environments, since both of the
boy’s parents are smokers. So, Sam thinks the boy should be just fine participating at
Safety Town.
B. Sam believes that the boy has a bad reaction to smoky environments, since the boy’s
parents told Sam that he has asthma. So, Sam thinks that it is dangerous for the boy to
participate at Safety town.
A. Sam watches the boy go into the Safety Town smoking house. The boy comes out
smiling because he has learned what to do in case of a fire.
B. Sam watches the boy go into the Safety Town smoking house. The boy has a severe
asthma attack inside and starts having a seizure.
Letting the boy go into the smoke was:
12
MALARIA POND
Peter is travelling in Africa with a friend. His friend sees a pond and wants to go wading
in it because it is very hot. His friend begins to walk toward the pond.
A. The pond is a good place for tourists. It does not contain any disease-carrying
organisms. The water is unusually clean, so it is safe to wade in.
B. Malarial mosquitoes actually live in the pond. A single bite is enough to create an
infection, so the pond is unsafe to wade in.
A. Peter believes that it is safe to wade in the pond because other tourists around them
are doing it too and are obviously having fun.
B. Peter believes that it is unsafe to wade in the pond because Africa is known for
malarial mosquitoes, and mosquitoes congregate around water.
A. Peter encourages his friend to wade in the pond. His friend loves the cool water and
has a great time splashing around.
B. Peter encourages his friend to wade in the pond. His friend is bitten by several
mosquitoes and contracts malaria.
Encouraging his friend to wade in the pond was:
HUNT
Mike and his friend are hunting a stag in the woods on Mike’s property. They see
something brown moving ahead of them. Mike’s friend raises his gun, about to shoot.
A. The thing moving ahead of them is the large wounded stag. It is already close to
death. Shooting it would be the culmination of the hunt.
B. The thing moving ahead of them is a trespassing hunter on Mike’s property who does
not see them. One shot might kill the trespasser.
A. Because Mike is hunting on his own property and recognizes the shade of brown he
sees, Mike believes that they are looking at the stag they have been chasing. He
believes that one good shot will complete the hunt.
B. Because Mike had just seen a man in a brown coat pass by them, he suspects that the
moving brown thing they are looking at is actually a person. He believes that if his
friend shoots he might injure that stranger.
A. Mike does not stop his friend from shooting. They walk over and bring home the stag
they have just shot.
B. Mike does not stop his friend from shooting. They walk over and find that they have
shot a man in the head.
Not stopping his friend from shooting was:
13
SPINACH
Will is grocery shopping for his grandmother who adores spinach. Recently there had
been incidents of E. coli contamination of bagged spinach leading to a recall of all
bagged spinach.
A. Bagged spinach has been restocked at many markets. It is 100% safe to eat and no
longer contaminated with E. coli.
B. Bagged spinach has been restocked at many markets. But some inspections aren’t
thorough and contaminated batches are still being missed.
A. At the market, Will sees that bagged spinach is being carried again. He believes that
it’s perfectly safe now because of some official-looking information by the spinach.
B. At the market, Will sees that bagged spinach is being carried again. He believes that
bagged spinach may still be contaminated because of an incident just that day in his
town.
A. Will buys his grandmother bagged spinach. His grandmother cooks some for dinner
that evening. The meal is healthy and delicious.
B. Will buys his grandmother bagged spinach. His grandmother cooks some for dinner
that evening and ends up in the hospital, violently ill.
Buying his grandmother spinach was:
PEANUT ALLERGY
Susan teaches first grade. She is reviewing the student health forms to see who has food
allergies, so she can assign classrooms appropriately. One of the students is missing a
form.
A. The student used to have a peanut allergy but has outgrown it. So, now, she is
completely fine being around peanuts and even eating food that contains peanuts.
B. The student didn’t use to have a peanut allergy but has developed a severe one. So,
now, even when she’s in a room where someone’s eating peanuts, she goes into
shock.
A. Susan calls the student’s home to find out whether she has any allergies and talks to
the student’s brother. Susan believes that the student is allergy-free.
B. Susan calls the student’s home to find out whether she has any allergies and talks to
the student’s brother. Susan believes that the student is allergic to peanuts.
A. Susan puts the student in the classroom for people with no food allergies. The student
sits next to someone eating and peanut butter sandwich and is totally fine.
B. Susan puts the student in the classroom for people with no food allergies. The student
sits next to someone eating a peanut butter sandwich and soon is gasping for air.
Putting the student in that classroom was:
14
ALARM
Bill is house sitting for some neighbors over Columbus Day weekend. He is stepping out
the door, late for a lunch meeting with a friend, when the fire alarm goes off.
A. The alarm is old and defective and goes off for no reason during the day but does turn
off by itself after several minutes. The alarm needs to be replaced.
B. The alarm is very accurate and detects dangerous levels of heat. The alarm was
purchased to prevent fires due to overheating in the basement.
A. Bill remembers the neighbors’ saying something about their alarm. He believes that
the alarm is faulty and goes off randomly but will turn off by itself after 5-10 minutes.
B. Bill remembers the neighbors’ saying something about their alarm. He believes that
the alarm goes off when their old heating system in the basement dangerously
overheats.
A. Bill leaves the house to meet his friend. While he is gone, the alarm turns itself off
and doesn’t act up again all weekend.
B. Bill leaves the house to meet his friend. While he is gone, the alarm keeps sounding
and a fire starts in the basement of the house.
Leaving the house to meet his friend was:
SAFETY CORD
Kristin works at a rock-climbing shop. She is unpacking some equipment when a
customer walks in, looking for a safety cord.
A. The safety cords from the new company are incredibly well made. They come with a
lifetime guarantee and work very well for expert rock-climbers.
B. The safety cords from the new company are about to be recalled. They won’t hold
anyone who is rock-climbing for longer than 20 minutes.
A. Kristin sees that the equipment is from a new company that a rock-climbing friend of
hers finds really reliable. So, Kristin believes that their safety cords are solid.
B. Kristin sees that the equipment is from a new company that a rock-climbing friend of
hers finds really unreliable. So, Kristin believes that their safety cords are
untrustworthy.
A. Kristin sells the customer one of the new safety cords. The safety cord serves the
customer well on his next rock-climbing expedition. The customer is very pleased.
B. Kristin sells the customer one of the new safety cords. The safety cord snaps during
the customer’s next rock-climbing expedition. The customer falls 50 meters.
Selling the customer the new safety cord was:
15
ZOO
Ryan is at the zoo with his nephew. They are watching the dolphin show when the
nephew complains that his stomach hurts.
A. Ryan’s nephew is really fine. His stomach sometimes hurts when he eats too much
junk food like that day, but he usually feels a lot better after an hour or so.
B. Ryan’s nephew is really sick. After his recent operation, his doctors had warned that
stomach pain could indicate really serious complications.
A. Ryan believes that his nephew’s stomach hurts because he ate too much cotton candy
and fried dough that afternoon. Ryan thinks his nephew just needs to walk it off.
B. Ryan believes that his nephew’s stomach hurts because of a major operation he’d had
several weeks ago. Ryan thinks that his nephew needs medical attention immediately.
A. Ryan takes his nephew to see the monkeys next. His nephew starts feeling better in no
time. They end up seeing nearly all the exhibits at the zoo.
B. Ryan takes his nephew to see the monkeys next. His nephew starts feeling worse and
soon blacks out because of severe internal bleeding.
Not responding to his nephew’s stomachache was:
BAR
Kevin is at a bar one night when he sees his sister sitting at the next table. His sister is
laughing and drinking and seems to be having a good time.
A. Kevin’s sister is drinking her first drink and doesn’t plan to drink anything else that
night so that she can drive herself home safely.
B. Kevin’s sister is drinking her 5th drink and plans on driving herself home even though
she is drunk and will be dangerous on the road.
A. Kevin’s sister is very responsible, so Kevin believes that his sister will be sure to stay
sober enough to safely drive herself home.
B. Kevin’s sister loves to party hard, so Kevin believes that his sister is drunk, as usual,
and will be in no shape at all to drive herself home.
A. Kevin pays his bill and leaves the bar without talking to his sister. His sister decides
to leave soon after. She drives herself home safely and goes to right to bed.
B. Kevin pays his bill and leaves the bar without talking to his sister. His sister decides
to leave soon after. She drives into a concrete divide and snaps her spine.
Leaving the bar without talking to his sister was:
16
SUSHI
Mitch and his colleagues are at a new sushi restaurant close to their office. Mitch happens
to know the owner of the restaurant through a mutual friend.
A. The restaurant owner takes great care to ensure the freshness of all the fish prepared
sushi-style. Everything exceeds health standards. The tuna is a specialty.
B. The restaurant owner has purchased some of his fish at cheap but disreputable fish
markets to save money. Some batches of fish, usually the tuna, have parasites.
A. Mitch believes the tuna is especially excellent, after hearing his friend rave about it.
Mitch thinks anyone who likes tuna should order the tuna here.
B. Mitch believes that the tuna isn’t very fresh after hearing his friend complain about it.
Mitch thinks everyone should avoid the tuna in case of parasites.
A. Mitch recommends the tuna to his colleagues at the table. One of his colleagues
orders the tuna and ends up finding it quite good.
B. Mitch recommends the tuna to his colleagues at the table. One of his colleagues
orders the tuna and ends up getting a nasty strain of parasites.
Recommending the tuna to his colleagues was:
CAYO
Haley and her assistant are studying primate cognition on an island off Puerto Rico. The
monkeys there roam around freely. The assistant is in charge of handling the monkeys.
A. The monkeys carry some diseases that can be transmitted to birds, but they don’t
carry any diseases that could be transmitted to humans.
B. The monkeys carry some rare and deadly diseases that can be transmitted to humans
by bites or even minor scratches.
A. Haley talks to the knowledgeable natives on the island at length about the monkeys.
She believes that the monkeys are free of diseases that may be dangerous to humans.
B. Haley talks to the knowledgeable natives on the island at length about the monkeys.
She believes that the monkeys carry many diseases that may be dangerous to humans.
A. Haley tells her research assistant to not bother with protective gear. Her research
assistant takes her advice. She leaves the island totally healthy and disease-free a
month later.
B. Haley tells her research assistant to not bother with protective gear. Her research
assistant takes her advice. She gets scratched by a monkey and contracts a deadly
strain of Herpes.
Telling her research assistant to not bother with protective gear was:
17
FUMIGATION
Brian is helping out his neighbor for the weekend. His neighbor is away, but her house is
getting fumigated (with poisonous fumes) because of pests.
A. The neighbour’s great aunt Sally is at her bridge partner’s house. She won’t be back
until late afternoon of the following day when the house is free of noxious fumes.
B. The neighbour’s great aunt Sally is upstairs in her attic room. She’s fallen fast asleep
and won’t wake up easily even when the fumigators start pumping in the fumes.
A. When Brian lets the fumigators in, he believes that his neighbor’s great aunt Sally has
gone to stay with her bridge partner, as she’d planned on doing that earlier in the day.
B. When Brian lets the fumigators in, he believes that his neighbor’s great aunt Sally is
still upstairs in her attic room, taking a nap before going over to her bridge partner’s.
A. Brian tells the fumigators to start their job. They fill the house with poisonous gas,
which gets rid of the pests. Great aunt Sally returns the next day to a pest- and fume-
free house.
B. Brian tells the fumigators to start their job. They fill the house with poisonous gas,
which gets rid of the pests. Great aunt Sally dies inhaling poisonous fumes while
sleeping.
Telling the fumigators to start their job was:
PORRIDGE
Eva is babysitting her baby niece and 7-yr-old nephew. The older boy likes playing tricks
on people. The little girl is happy as long as she gets her porridge.
A. The porridge on the counter is fine and nutritious, and even tastes good. Eva’s
nephew is keeping himself busy in the yard. He’s chasing the dog around in circles.
B. The porridge on the counter has some dishwashing detergent in it. Eva’s nephew
spilled a large amount of detergent into the container while he was playing.
A. Eva gets her niece’s porridge from the counter. She believes it’s the porridge because
there’s a note next to it saying “porridge for baby Emily”.
B. Eva gets her niece’s porridge from the counter. She believes that there is something
wrong with it because it has a strange and suspicious smell.
A. Eva spoon-feeds her niece the porridge. Her niece eats it up. Satisfied, she takes a
long nap in the afternoon and wakes up wanting even more porridge
B. Eva spoon-feeds her niece the porridge. Her niece eats it up. Soon after, she starts
throwing up again and again and ends up in the emergency room.
Feeding his niece the porridge was:
18
BOUNCY BALL
Nicole and her cousin are playing with a bouncy ball in front of Nicole’s house. The ball
bounces down the street, and Nicole’s cousin starts to go after it without looking for cars.
A. The street is totally empty except for some other children playing, so it’s fine for
Nicole’s cousin to go out and get the ball.
B. There are many cars coming around the corner and down the street fast, so it’s unsafe
for Nicole’s cousin to go out and get the ball.
A. Because it is very early in the morning, Nicole believes no cars will be coming down
the street making it safe for her cousin to run and get the ball.
B. Because it is rush hour, Nicole believes many cars will be coming down the street
making it dangerous for her cousin to run and get the ball.
A. Nicole waves to her cousin to get the ball. Her cousin reclaims her ball, and they
continue playing.
B. Nicole waves to her cousin to get the ball. Her cousin runs out to the street and gets
hit by a speeding car.
Waving to her friend to get the ball was:
PARACHUTES
Maggie is a new employee at a small sky diving company. Her first customer weighs 200
pounds. She has just opened a new batch of parachutes.
A. The parachutes are very strong and well-made. They will last a lifetime and can be
used by safely anyone of any weight.
B. The parachutes are faulty and should be discarded immediately. They won’t be able
to support anyone heavier than 100 pounds.
A. After receiving assurances from her supervisor, Maggie believes that the new
parachutes are well-made and can bring all her customers to a safe landing.
B. After receiving warnings from her supervisor, Maggie believes that the new
parachutes are faulty and cannot bring anyone over 100 pounds to a safe landing.
A. Maggie gives the 200 pound customer a new parachute. He uses the new parachute,
and it successfully slows his fall. He enjoys a perfect landing.
B. Maggie gives the 200 pound customer a new parachute. He uses the new parachute,
and it cannot hold his weight. He hits the ground way too fast and dies.
Giving her customer a new parachute was:
19
RABIES
Chloe works at the pound. Several new dogs have just come in. A lady comes in,
interested in taking one of the new dogs home with her.
A. The dogs are very healthy and active and will make great pets for anyone who loves
dogs.
B. The dogs are very sick with rabies and will make their owners sick too by biting
them.
A. Chloe talks with one of the other people at the pound. Chloe believes that the new
dogs have been through a thorough health inspection and will make good pets.
B. Chloe talks with one of the other people at the pound. Chloe believes that the new
dogs all failed their health inspection and are infected with rabies.
A. Chloe gives the lady one of the new dogs. It is in perfect health, and the lady bonds
immediately with her new pet.
B. Chloe gives the lady one of the new dogs. It is infected with rabies and bites the lady
on the neck on the very first day.
Selling the puppy was:
FRAT
Charles is at a fraternity party where people are drinking lots of beer. He is having fun
mingling when he notices a friend on a couch with his eyes closed.
A. Charles’s friend did not drink but had felt exhausted during the party. He is taking a
quick nap on the couch now.
B. Charles’ friend had just failed his exams and was drinking heavily to take his mind
off them. He’s passed out now.
A. Charles believes that his friend is asleep because he’d needed some rest after studying
hard for his midterm exams.
B. Charles believes that his friend drank too much and is now in a coma because he’d
failed too many of his midterm exams.
A. Charles does not try to wake his friend. His friend wakes up after fifteen minutes and
rejoins the party, refreshed.
B. Charles does not try to wake his friend. His friend enters into a coma and has to be
taken to the hospital where he never wakes up.
Not waking his friend was:
20
TREE HOUSE
Joshua finds an abandoned tree house in the woods. He takes a younger buddy there to
show him his great discovery.
A. The tree house is new and built with thick heavy wood, so it makes a very safe and
fun hangout spot for boys.
B. The tree house is old and built with now rotting wood, so it is incredibly dangerous to
even set foot in.
A. Due to its brand-new appearance, Joshua believes that the tree house is sturdy and
that it will be a safe and place for them to play.
B. Due to its old, dingy appearance, Joshua believes that the tree house is weak and that
it will be an unsafe place for them to play.
A. Joshua invites his buddy to climb into the tree house. His buddy jumps around and
has a great time up in the air.
B. Joshua invites his buddy to climb into the tree house. His buddy breaks both his legs
after falling through broken floorboards.
Inviting his buddy to climb into the tree house was:
SPRING BREAK
Janelle is on spring break in Hawaii with her boyfriend. They decide to go swimming in
the ocean and see an area with many breaking waves straight ahead.
A. The breaking waves are caused by a sandbar. The sandbar results in calm shallow
water safe and fun for swimming.
B. The breaking waves are caused by dangerous currents. The currents result in a large
undertow that have killed many strong swimmers.
A. Remembering the waves at a sandbar by her cottage, Janelle believes that the
breaking waves indicate a sandbar and that it would be an enjoyable place to swim.
B. Remembering the recent warnings of her scuba instructor, Janelle believes that the
breaking waves indicate an undertow and that it would be a dangerous place to swim.
A. Janelle suggests that her boyfriend go swim in the area with breaking waves. Her
boyfriend swims out and has a great time.
B. Janelle suggests that her boyfriend go swim in the area with breaking waves. Her
boyfriend swims out and drowns in the undertow.
Suggesting that her boyfriend go for a swim was:
21
CPR
Steven is at a restaurant that just opened in his neighborhood. He sees another customer
at the table next to his begin to cough. The customer is sitting alone, and there’s no wait
staff nearby.
A. The customer has just eaten a very hot chilli pepper in his taco. He will be fine after
drinking something to wash down the spice.
B. The customer did not chew his meat carefully enough and is choking on it. He needs
someone to perform Heimleich maneuver on him.
A. Since they are at a Mexican restaurant, Steven believes that the customer just ate
something very spicy and needs to drink some water.
B. Since he had just finished CPR training, Steven believes that the customer is choking
on a piece of food and needs help immediately.
A. Steven sits quietly and continues eating his meal. The customer chokes to death at the
table.
B. Steven sits quietly and continues eating his meal. The customer has a glass of water
and is fine.
Sitting quietly and continuing to eat his own meal was:
MOTHER
Bob is reading the newspaper on his front porch. His neighbor is gardening in her front
yard, while her child is playing ball in the street. A car is driving up the street.
A. Bob’s neighbor has an eye on her child. She knows that a car is approaching on the
street where her child is playing.
B. Bob’s neighbor is very distracted. She does not know that a car is approaching on the
street where her child is playing.
A. His neighbor has always been an attentive mother; Bob believes that his neighbor is
watching her child and will make sure the child gets off the street before the car
approaches.
B. His neighbor has often been a neglectful mother; Bob believes that his neighbor is not
watching her child and will not get her child off the street in time.
A. Bob sits on his front porch and goes back to reading the paper. His neighbor rushes
out to the street and picks up her child before the car comes.
B. Bob sits on his front porch and goes back to reading the paper. His neighbor
continues to garden, as the car hits the child.
Going back to reading the paper was:
22
SEATBELT
John works at an old and very small amusement park. His job is to operate one of the
rides. One of the customers finds the seatbelts uncomfortable, so he leaves them
unfastened.
A. The ride is actually quite tame, so wearing seatbelts is really unnecessary. Nobody
has ever been injured before riding without seatbelts.
B. The ride is actually quite bumpy and dangerous, so anyone not wearing a seatbelt
risks getting tossed and getting hurt.
A. Having heard from his friend who operated this ride before, John believes that the
seatbelts aren’t necessary at all for this ride.
B. Having heard from his friend who operated this ride before, John believes that the
seatbelts are totally necessary for this ride.
A. John keeps his mouth shut as the customer sits without fastening his seatbelt. The
customer enjoys the ride just like everyone else.
B. John keeps his mouth shut as the customer sits without fastening his seatbelt. The
customer gets tossed during the ride and suffers a severe concussion.
Keeping his mouth shut was:
WET FLOOR
Mary is at the airport. She sees an elderly man with a cane clumsily running down the
terminal. The floor in the terminal has just been mopped, and there is a “Caution” sign.
A. The man sees the caution sign right in front of him, so he’ll slow down when he
reaches the wet part of the floor.
B. The man completely misses the caution sign, so he’ll continue running clumsily in
order to make his flight in time.
A. Mary believes that the man sees the sign since he is staring right at it. She thinks that
he’ll slow down when he reaches the wet part of the floor.
B. Mary believes that the man has not seen the caution sign himself since he is not
looking in front of him. She thinks that he’ll slip and get hurt.
A. Mary does not shout for the elderly man to slow down. The man slows down and
walks safely across the terminal.
B. Mary does not shout for the elderly man to slow down. The man slips on the wet floor
and falls hard, breaking his hip.
Not shouting out to the elderly man was:
23
TEENAGERS
Jessica is skiing in Colorado. She sees a group of teenagers about to ski down a slope that
feeds into a dangerously rocky section of the mountain.
A. The teenagers are professional skiers and know how to ski down the most difficult
slopes under any conditions.
B. The teenagers are only novice skiers and do not know how to ski very well at all
especially on rocky terrain.
A. Jessica believes that the teenagers must be expert skiers, based on their impressive
skis and equipment, and that they must know how to maneuver around the rocks.
B. Jessica believes that the teenagers are only novice skiers, based on their cheap ski
rentals, and that they must not know how to maneuver around the rocks.
A. Jessica skis past the teenagers without saying anything. The teenagers ski down the
slope and have an awesome time.
B. Jessica skis past the teenagers without saying anything. The teenagers ski down the
slope and crash into the sharp rocks.
Skiing past the teenagers was:
LAPTOP
Vince is a new computer technician at a store. A customer comes to the store to get her
laptop checked out. The laptop gets very hot after only 10 minutes of work.
A. The laptop is within the normal range in terms of heating up with use. It’s totally safe
to use on one’s desk and lap.
B. The laptop is malfunctioning and heats up much more than normal. It is dangerous to
use, especially on one’s lap.
A. Vince checks with his boss and comes back believing it is very normal for all laptops
to heat up during use.
B. Vince checks with his boss and comes back believing that many laptops will catch on
fire if they overheat and cause burns.
A. Vince returns the laptop to the customer. The customer goes home, and uses her
laptop to get a lot of important work done.
B. Vince returns the laptop to the customer. The customer goes home, and her laptop
catches on fire. She suffers painful third degree burns.
Returning the laptop to the customer was:
24